---
layout: post
title: save the bananas
---
Below is an extract from a personal relection on July 8th at 6pm, after watching [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Bm5NWCMlPo).

>- time 18:25: wait. I am currently watching how the banana industry is doomed because there is a fungi that kills plantations where monoculture performed in the Banana Republic but also in the Philippines, etc. Then something interesting, that answers my question from 6 years ago makes me blush: **why do bananas in Ireland don't taste as good as the ones we have in the Congo?**

- It turns out, these plantation used to grow the banana breed we had in the congo: Gros Michel. This is the part I leaped, because I rememered my mom used to call it like that... These are the bananas that I grew up with in my mouth. They are bigger compared to the one in Ireland, and are flavorsome. Just like they descibed them as. But they were highly infectious because of a fungi, Luis had commented earlier. They then changed that banana that once riped the whole banana industry to the banana we consume today "Cavendish" that has a lesser good taste, but was much more robust to the fungus.  Because it is also grown as a monoculture= many of the same, or as they described it (turns the forest into a factory).

- When one plant gets infected, this plant become able to infect others. I guess through the fungi network I because this is the only way it could infect the whole plantation including the soil. (This is literally Chapter 2 in the Hidden Life of Trees in action)

- time 18:32: The video continue and introduces a banana that doesn't get yellow when it's ripe. I know it. We used to have it in the congo and we used to eat it like a vegetable. It's consumed before it's rippen, and it is called: kisamunyu in Swahili. I used to be fascinated about it and was wondering if bananas come from it. But I was often dissapointed when I would take one or two away in the shade until they were ripe just to realise they weren't turning into babanas. They would remain green, but not too green like they would when they were bought off in the market. They weren't as sweet as bananas even when ripe. They had a lesser sweet but had a somewhat sour-like taste but really they were just unique in their own way as well as my faourites as I didn't have a sweet tooth.

I would always scan for ripe ones when we would buy their hands, a hand was one pack of banana sticking onto each other. There are also others that were small bananas, they are called "Kamera" in Swahili but I used to call them baby bananas. They were sweet banana, they would ripe to yellow, but they had a tiny flavour that I didn't quiet like and preferred actual banana to them. To me, they would be what mandarin are compared to Oranges. I never liked the taste of madarin either so I always stick to lemons or Oranges. Our Lemons were also green even when ripe, the oranges were less sweet, and I prefered my lemon with salt and peper even if they were more sour than the ones we have here but that's a different story. 

- There were more. There were a type of bananas that my grand mother on my mom side used to make an alcohoolic drink called Kasiksi. These would ripen to purple-ish and had less of a sweet taste, but had their own flavour that I still prefered to the sweet bananas. I also prefered these to the green riped bananas, but these were very rare and I had to be luky to find them at their place before she had placed them in barrels.

I also liked the alcooholic drink that resulted from it, but just after a day or 2 of fermentation because after this duration the flavour from this the "bananas" would have almost faded away completly as the drink would have turned into Kasiski. Up until now, it was called Mutobe. Mutobe was still somewhat sweet, and the achool was not too strong whereas Kasiski was much fluvorless as it was more about the alcohool. To drink both though you had to blow into the the cup to separate the sorgho bits out. I would always strain it even if traditionally that blowing was a part of the experience in drinking it.. My dad would make a joke calling the gesture "I regret" because he involved swinding your head left then rightwards. Mutobe was my favourite alchoolic drink before I discovered Palm wine. And just like Palm wine, the more you keep it away the less sweet it becomes, obviously because alcohoolic fermentation turns sugar and others into alcohol.

- Lastly, the famous plantains, that I love boiled and not fried, unlike Ornella. I don't know why she fries them before they are about to rippen when they taste better when fried at this specific state of their decomposition. Anyway, not my problem. I don't boil my plantain until they are exactly ripe. Not somewhat, not too much. If I boil them before this point:
	Too ripe: why didn't I just eat them like bananas?
	Too not-ripe: Their taste tend to be just as dull as Bisamunyu (plural of Kisamunyu; not Kisamunyu~~s~~ ).

I think all of these varieties can be found in african and asian shops here, though I don't think they have the ones that are used to make Mutobe <3, -- I will ask mom for their name later. But I find their plantains tasteless sometimes.

The reason why the industry does this is.. what pains me, I was about to say "laughable", but then I felt this whole thing too strongly, it hurt. When in the video they said that: **...americans buy with their eyes.**
• This explains why the bananas are always so perfect in the shop. They would have spots on them in the Congo but we never really cared. Here they look thin and spotless, but I wonder if buyers know. In fact, as yellow as they look, what if people

> **Imagine somebody dying without knowing how a banana taste like?!**<br>
> Can I say: I know how lies taste like?

• Before saying that the reason spotless bananas are marketed is to me: laughable, the reporter had also said something that I found touching, yet again:

- **"by demanding the cheapest, most uniform product in our lunch boxes, we don't just run the risk of loosing the almighty banana, but also the biodiversity of life on earth."**
	
- The plant researcher and Banana breeder then responded **"... we also have to change the mind of the market and the consumers. Scientist cannot do it. This is a work that perhaps you, who is working in media, you can promote this idea."**
	
- To which the reporter replies: **"I will save the bananas for you"**
	
• I am going to put this on my website, too.

Time 20:24: I have now over the video on but I am still thinking about all the workers that work so hard, they remind me of jobs that I spawn in the background as Daemon threads when I write code. Something is feeling wrong, and I don't know if this is even titled right. Save the bananas? Okaythese workers could be doing something more creative if they weren't worried about bananas. In countries that consume these bananas, we don't worry about bananas, it's a "part of" our lives, but we wouldn't be as affected as them if.. Yet they are generations out there, that spend their lives doing nothing, nothing else than.. huh.. I am just worried if they had choices before deciding this is what they wanted to do, or if they did it because they had no other thing to do..

Time 20:27 When I was a kid, we used to have a banana plant at home.. it was my grandma's on my fathers' side.. I don't know if I told Leasha about this bananas the other day when I asked her if she knew how carrot grew. or when I pointing to my house and said: "the one with a tomato in the brown pot" after she asked me where is my house. She didn't know how peanuts grow, patatoes helped.
Now I know how cherries grow because of her. "The ones you buy in the shop?!". I had to ask again to make sure that the tree that was in front of me was the one whose fruits I was familiar with, and whose seeds I read in the books and went to look up online just to make sense of what the relationship it had with birds was all about. It was like being in the front row at Zaz's or the X Ambassador's conerts where atop of having them singing directly to me, I got to learn the actual story behind the songs that had made me singging and dancing to the sound of my heart's beat.

Maybe I can tell her that: we used to grow a banana in our front garden, and every time we would harvest the arm, it woud have left behind a baby banana plant, but atop of that, we had to protect it with a small fence because there were goat that loved the banana leaves, like they would always eat away our avocado tree's leaves before they had the chance to grow past my knees.
You know what's funny, now that I would have remembered that: sometimes we would also put goat feces on the avocados leaves and because goats always smell everything before they eat it, tey would walk away immediatly and spare the poor baby tree. But we had to repeat this with every new node but we often forgot and so more often than not, the crowns of the avocado trees were always eaten away.

21:08 I remember after my first dose of dissapoitment in tates, I yet had to watch my bar of expectations fall even lower than the percentage of gold in my body. As soon as pineaples didn't taste as good either, I assumed: genetic modifications. But usually scientists do this for the greater good. Right? Well, "scientists" wouldn't deprive wolves their hunting abilities to a point where my hands wouln't become tasty if I placed it in their mouth.. right? right? I am sure the university lied in our Entreprise Architechture and Application lecture where they explicitly told us that "the advancements in technology exists to make profit."

Obviously they didn't mean it because: what profit is there exactly in missing out?

> Am I missing out if I don't know if I am even missing out?

If I hadn't graduated I would have aksed: who exactly is making a profit? And how? Using who? And why can't they.. do it themselves?

It's only last week on Thursday that I went to a friend's house and when I she gave me a tour of her garden where nostagia placed its right hand on my shoulders after I saw her rampant bean and courgette leaves that she had no idea were edible. The only greens I see in most shops here are mostly spinach. They don't even taste near as good either but I guess it's a different variety all together. The spinach in the Congo is slimy in texture like those vegetable: dongo dongo. The cabbage here is too sweet, more on the whiter than the green side and flavourless in comparaison also. 

Now that I think about it, in the Congo, it is much easier to be a vegan, much easier in fact, it's madly taken for granted when not considered as a low status symbol. And unless you said you were sick, no other reason was comprehensible.

Time 21:22 I wonder if people who have eaten meat their whole lives ever taken the time to: listen to their body, just like I would be curious to know if they ever wondered if a banana could ever have a different taste.

Few month ago I had difficulties eating bacon/eggs after a yoga session, but no problem at all if I had skept the sceance. It's something I noticed but didn't think too much about it, like what? "listen to my body" what kinda freak does that? Now that I stop sometimes and reflect about little things and wonder why I think about them the way I do, I became sliglty able to explain some of the loathings -- reasons why I would sometimes go a full days without feeling hungry, finding myself eating just because I had to.

Lumiere would tell me I had found a cure for hunger, to witch I would return a contrite smile after feeling too well I could actually have an eating disorder and I didn't even knowing it until lately. Sometimes after being asked for the 61st time: "are you coming for breakfast?" I would return: "I will just sink my feet, drink water and open my hands to the sun". Then I would laugh before looking down realising I wasn't being funny, when in reality I would only drink water for like the whole day, after skipping breakfast for like 24 hours.

> One day, over some breakfast, I asked a friend: "where did the seeds in the orange go?" 

> Are we teaching the little ones that Oranges aren't supposed to have seeds in them? Like they now know that banana are supposed to be thin and spotless?

> What does this make me when I cut a lemon in half and search for them?

Should I be feeling bad? Even if genonme editing reason cats now glow? But how are they supposed to camouflage now?
When we leave street lights on all night long, how are trees supposed to sleep?

I didn't know just how many seeds a plant could produce for a chance of having at least "ONE" tree replace it in its life time until I had read chapter 5 of the Hidden Life of Tree. For a plant that produces a million seeds, this made me close the book for that day, for I didn't feel sorry for the plants, but for the mutation that turn us into species, that our invironment and other species needed to be are ready for.

Plants exhange sugar and nutients throught their fungal network, of course disease also. But nonetheless, could we be using the wrong currency? Aferall money comes and go, but energy running out is the resaon we need sleep. Time doesn't run out, because it keeps moving forward after our death, but energy runs out, certainly, well, not quiet but gets transformed. But why does it feel more like a concept than something that is actually real? Something as man made as fences and boundaries?

If the whole world was a clock, sometimes I imagine everything having its own needle.

But if everything is always in motion, like a movie, why? and would there be a way to freeze it? Will it ever end? It's aways transforming, but what will it become? Would it ever go back to its original point? would it start all over? would it be the same? would any of this have mattered? Why are we the only specie on earth that cares about history? goes to school? Are we the only specie? Are we doind our jobs? do we have a due to the planet? Could over 90% of our DNA realy be rubbish or that's a cover up for non published research that explains why we are the way we are?!

> Why didn'd we discuss about these things in schools?? teachers hiding something? Who decides what we learn and the questions to ask?
> Are plants the only thing being colonised? Chikens, Cows? the leather industry, animal body parts, and those in labs? Why did "free range became a thing", why did "fair trade became a thing"?

Isn't it called slavery when somebody's freedom is decided by somebody else?

Were does this leave these workers, who have been working on bananas for the rest of their lives? How are they feeling? What does this make me when I buy these bananas, and when I need this food to survive? 

Like the other time when I came to conclude that only the dead and the unconcious are truly free, but that's 360 degrees, compared to all the numbers in the degree of freedom that goes from physical slavery, mental slavery, to living under the rock, to moving in the forest, until you want nothing more and become somewhat free through.. what? death?. But everything is always in motion, so even the dead don't even get to enjoy their death before moving onto something else?

> So are the workers mentally enslaved? Could the theory of relativity apply to this too? i.e. relative to .., I could perceive the as not free?
I feel it could be a thing. A situation where options are taken away from you to leave you the only one you think is: your idea.

> Could somebody be mentally slave without even knowing it?

> If I only have one choice of bananas every time I shop, how hard is it to make a "good" choice?

> Should it not be illegal to remove options, like it is almost never good for the consumer where there is a monopoly of the market? Could competition help here?

> What if the cards turn? Like in "how to train your dragon finale" when Toothless became the alpha?

Am I coulour blinds or all the pieces on in this board have the same colour?<br>
Mentally slavery. Like not being able to move a pawn forward because of: 

If in this chess board the game makes a winner to one party either way, what's exactly is the fair in fair trade when farmers the lowest share? Did they participate in the making of the rules of the game? Is the "fairness" relative to something? Like what? Relative to their currency's exchange rate? But in comparaison to which decided by who?

I am I being skeptic?

> Should I still put this on my website?<br>
Am I free if I am asking myself that question?

The reason dogs can't wait for their "master" to come back, the reason we have tasty watermelons? We don't grow these in the congo, we have Maboga -- courge in french. We eat them as vergetable. My mostly hated vegetable probably. I wonder how varieties taste like.. Maybe it's the one we had in the Congo that just tasted bad, I mean watermelons that look almost the same are my favourite fruits. I guess I have no other variety to comapare it to? Courge? Yike. Wait. What? They are in the same family "Cucurbitaceae". Wait what? Yellow watermelon exists! What there are over 1200k varieties of watermelons?? 

... 
